---
layout: post
title: Website A/B Testing and Unknown, Unknowns
post_date: 25 February, 2012 -- Menlo Park, CA
---

Whenever I consider risk, I suspect that *unknown* unknowns do not get
enough of my attention. I step back and think, “what might happen that I
haven’t thought of?” And always my intuition responds: good luck
answering *that* question properly.

Known unknowns tend to dominate human risk analysis. For instance, I
might know that *I don’t know* whether some action will cause my friend
to initiate a blood-feud against me. In this case, the notion of
“blood-feud” passes through my head when I consider a course of action,
but I don’t know for certain the likelihood of its outcome. This is a
known unknown, uncertainty with respect to a certain chain of causation.

*Unknown* unknowns have a more slippery quality, and in the general case
are intractable. To know something presently unknown to me, I must think
of it. Yet I cannot simply “think of” an infinite number of unknown
consequences when considering a potential action. The human mind doesn’t
work that way, and the domain of daily life is too complex. But are
unknown unknowns always so impractical? Not necessarily.

Consider the well-defined domain of A/B testing, which nonetheless falls
victim to the same biases which crop up in everyday decision-making.
Most forms of website A/B testing conduct a search over the known
unknowns. You select some feature which you think may affect a metric,
and tweak it to see whether your hypothesis is true. This is empirical,
sound, and good. But why not also search over the *unknown* unknowns? In
this domain, at least they are enumerable.

A site likely has features that its creator has not considered, but
which when adjusted, may positively affect conversion rates. You might
never have suspected that increasing the font-size of your
call-to-action by 1% would lead to 5% more sign-ups, or that brightening
the hue of your button by 3% would result in 7% more click-throughs. The
space of small permutations to an existing website design is very large
— too large for a human to consider, but not too large for an algorithm.

So stay tuned. And if this interests you, by all means [get in
touch](mailto:ethan@proxino.com).
