---
layout: post
title: Old Palo Alto
post_date: 15 July, 2012 -- Menlo Park, CA
---

I walk sometimes through Old Palo Alto. It’s where some of the richest people
live, a few miles outside the main drag, a place where property values
reach beyond the tens of millions. I find it amusing to pretend to be a
person who lives in one of these houses, a bit of young money out for a
stroll. Of course I don’t particularly want to live in that
neighborhood, and I don’t care about money (at least, not for *that*
reason), but it’s a game of mine.

So in Old Palo Alto I turn up my shoulders and walk with that relaxed,
confidant air you see sometimes in people around here. I play sidewalk
chicken with my fellow pedestrians (who are rare), and I generally enjoy
the scenery. In Old Palo Alto, trees always line the streets. It is very
beautiful.

Today I walked by Steve Job’s house.

I think it was his house, anyway. It was on the right street. I don’t
actually know what his house looks like. But this particular house had a
group of four eastern Europeans lounging on the sidewalk before the
front lawn: two men and two women.

They saw me approaching, and I had an intuition that something would
happen. You probably know it, that slight tension which seems to build
before two strangers enter into a conversation. I was still yards away,
so I tried to look more imposing to ensure they wouldn’t bother me.

I thought I’d made it past them, when one of the men spoke. His hand
hailed me with a yellow rubber ball.

“Is this Steve Job’s house?” He waved at the property across the
sidewalk.

He had a thick accent, and I had him repeat the question. The house he
meant was undergoing renovation, but I wasn’t sure whether this made his
suspicion more or less likely. I told him I didn’t know.

“But don’t you live here?”

“I live around here, but not *here*.” I shrugged and gestured at the
ground. “It might be his house, I don’t know.” I took a step forward.

“You’re not *sure* whether this is Steve Jobs house?” he said. I suppose
he might have thought I was lying. He looked incredulous. I should have
asked him *why* he wanted to know, but I didn’t. I just shook my head
and kept walking.

That’s life in Palo Alto.
