---
layout: post
title: See Things as They Are
post_date: 22 April, 2012 -- Menlo Park, CA
---

It can be hard to see things as they are. Perceptions embody implicit
assumptions which, often, allow you to arrive efficiently at truth, and
to parse the world at speed. But not always.

When you perceive, you ought to recognize what assumptions you’ve made,
and what others you’re predisposed to making. Otherwise you can elide
the details of reality. You might assume easy or pleasant abstractions.

Reality doesn’t care if you elide it. It just *is*. But make predictions
on the basis of what *isn’t*, and you’re likely to suffer.

Suppose I see “a mother walking with her baby down the street.” Wrong.
I’ve generalized from incomplete data. What I actually see is a
middle-aged woman pushing a stroller. I don’t see the baby, and I
couldn’t possibly see the blood-ties, supposing that a baby exists. Yet
what I perceive is a mother.

In this particular situation, what *is* likely agrees with what I
perceive. It’s a simple matter of probabilities. Most women walking down
the street with strollers do have a baby in the stroller and are that
baby’s mother. But while this may be true, my mind doesn’t go through
that chain of reasoning.

Things don’t always work out so nicely.

For instance, tricky software bugs often arise from incorrect implicit
assumptions. If you assume something and don’t think about it, then you
don’t consider that it might have a role in what’s going wrong, and you
certainly don’t fix it. So people who can debug software well are good
at making implicit assumptions explicit[^1].

And if humans are capable of naive perceptions about something as
logical as computer software, I suspect that we make more and worse
mistakes in the broader context of life.

Perceive carefully.

[^1]: Another reason to encourage [coderacy](/2012/02/the-rise-of-coderacy/).
