---
layout: post
title: Reciprocity and the Status Quo
post_date: 22 April, 2012 -- Menlo Park, CA
---

Humans tend to reciprocate by default. Do me a favor, and I’m inclined
to repay in kind. You don’t have to be a determinist to see the mental
gears turn.

As Cialdini[^1] would say: click, whirr.

Problems arise when savvy individuals take advantage of this mechanism.
A car salesmen will do you trivial favors: open your door, adjust your
seat, offer to help you with your coat, and so on. She hopes you will
reciprocate by buying a car.

Yet while a deft manipulator takes advantage of our urge to reciprocate,
repeated reciprocity is not nearly so useful. Humans may be inclined to
repay a single favor, but a series of similar favors can actually leave
us *less* inclined.

For two wrongs do make a right, when reciprocity interacts with the
status quo.

The status quo bias leads us to privilege what is normal. It provides an
anchoring effect[^2] that keeps us in our comfort zone. And it can
subsume reciprocity. For when the same “favor” is done often enough, it
slips into our notion of what is normal. A truly expected favor is not
really a favor at all. It becomes an entitlement. So to take advantage
of reciprocity, you must provide an *unexpected* favor. Otherwise we
will wrap it into the status quo on which we anchor, justly or unjustly.

In this way your salary, which at first may have seemed exorbitant, soon
becomes a matter of simple justice. For it is a repeated event. Bonuses
more effectively instill your loyalty through reciprocation.

Pit the reciprocity bias against anchoring in a fight to the death, and
you might end up with a Rational Human. But better to avoid either in
the first place.

[^1]: I recommend his book, [Influence: Science and Practice](http://www.amazon.com/Influence-Science-Practice-5th-Edition/dp/0205609996/ref=sr_1_3?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1335289034&sr=1-3).

[^2]: Obligatory [wikipedia link](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anchoring). I can also vouch for Baron’s [Thinking and Deciding](http://www.amazon.com/Thinking-Deciding-Jonathan-Baron/dp/0521862078/ref=tmm_hrd_title_0) as a reasonable introduction to human decision-making (and the biases therein).
