---
layout: post
title: Go Meta
post_date: 9 September, 2012 -- Menlo Park, CA
---

It’s easy, sometimes, to become frustrated by events or
circumstances outside of our control. Since frustration is rarely
useful, I’ve developed a strategy which, with high probability, will
make it go away. I call this strategy *go meta*.

We tend to think and get annoyed about things we perceive through direct
experience. The dog barks too loudly, perhaps, or your grandfather just
told you to shut up, or your spouse left the garage door open. These are
all surface reactions to your environment, causes which justify your
irritation.

But I don’t like to become annoyed without deciding to be annoyed, nor
play the puppet to environmental stimulus (or possibly human intention,
if you’re dealing with someone who enjoys manipulation). So I step back
and think thoughts about thinking.

If you’ve become frustrated, you can examine that frustration. Does it
benefit you? Not usually. Can the situation be spun in your favor? The
act of introspection, itself, is often enough to get rid of unwanted
emotion.

So when the dog barks, you don’t get annoyed, or maybe you do, but first
you catch yourself. You think: I’ve become annoyed, and do I want to be
the sort of person annoyed by a barking dog? The dog’s barking may be
*unfair*, and you may even decide to take steps toward a remedy (buy a
shotgun?) but there isn’t any need to feel personally invested — unless
of course you want to be.

This strategy can be useful in other kinds of situations, though the
principle is the same. Ever felt disrespected? You should ask yourself
whether it’s of any benefit to feel that way. Second order (or third
order) thinking can present you with freedoms otherwise absent from your
surface interactions with the world.

People and circumstance and fate may do things you don’t like, but you
can always control your reaction. Just go meta.
