---
layout: post
title: Programmers Can Be Artists
post_date: 07 March, 2012 -- Menlo Park, CA
---

In an [earlier post](/2012/01/programming-education-rationality/), I
suggested that the ability to program computers encourages rational mental models.
That’s far from its only perk. Coderacy also heightens your artistic
potential.

An artist is constrained by his or her medium of expression. A painter,
no matter how skilled, cannot construct moving images with her paints
and brushes. A filmmaker, no matter how hard she tries, cannot elicit
the subtle, internal effects of *point of view* and *tone of thought*
available to a novelist. Yet a novelist, in words, cannot render the
rich and vibrant images of a movie or a painting. Each medium has
certain tradeoffs.

Coderacy opens up a new world of artistic expression — literally. Art is
nothing more than *inspired* information, and computers are general
information processing frameworks. This makes art accessible to
computation. Computers blend the worlds of the painter, the filmmaker,
and the novelist. Disparate art forms can mix and mingle.

Yet coderacy doesn’t just allow the old art forms to mix, it opens up
new possibilities. For most people, art has traditionally been a passive
affair. I read a novel alone, but when a story instills in me questions,
I cannot hold a conversation with my book. I may watch a movie with
friends, and perhaps we even talk about it, but we cannot converse
directly with the medium itself. Computers change the rules of this
game. Utterly.

Consider that certain respectable philosophers suggest we live inside a
computer simulation, and that they are taken seriously[^1]. They
haven’t been mocked into oblivion for one simple reason: *such an idea
is theoretically possible*. In the limit, computation enables the kind
of world-building of which a filmmaker or novelist can only dream[^2].

So what’s the upper bound for the *artistic potential* of a programmer?
Godhood. When you construct a virtual world, you get to play the deity.
To get there you have to solve a whole host of logistical problems, and
overcome incredible resource constraints. But still, it sounds rather
appealing, no?

Of course we aren’t even close to achieving such potential, but you can
see the signs of our slow, upward progression. Video games — a simple
form of world-bulding — have become more complex over time, and research
into virtual worlds has become ever more popular. Yet truly artistic
computation remains in its early years.

I look forward to seeing what comes next.

[^1]: As seriously as any modern philosophers are taken.

[^2]: Of both the interactive and passive varieties. You might choose to interact with your virtual world, but for a sufficiently complex world, you might also choose to watch it like a television show.
